Assessment Brief

Professional Development & Critical Thinking

Module Name Lecturer Name

Professional Development +

Critical Thinking Catherine Noonan

Title of Brief

Critical Thinking

Percentage of Overall Grade 30%

Date handed out 09/02/2026

Due date tbc

Individual or Group Individual

Learning Outcomes

The Minimum Intended Module Learning Outcomes of the Module are:

1. Audit, evaluate and critically reflect upon strengths and weaknesses in knowledge, skills and abilities

2. Evaluate and critically reflect upon self-presentation, particularly those aspects that relate to career development

3. Develop a professional portfolio that highlights their skills as a Creative Computing practitioner.

4. Demonstrate critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics.

This assessment will primarily assess the MIMLO 4.

Description

AI systems are increasingly used in areas such as healthcare, education, finance, policing, social media, and employment.

While AI can offer significant benefits, it also raises important ethical concerns.

In this assessment, you are asked to describe an AI project or application (Part 1) and present on the ethical issues that arise from its design, development, deployment or use (Part 2).

The aim of this assignment is to demonstrate your ability to:

· Understand how AI technologies operate in real-world contexts

· Identify ethical risks and dilemmas

· Critically evaluate and analyse impacts on individuals, communities, and society

· Communicate your findings and ideas clearly and professionally

Deliverables

Part 1: (15%)

Write a description of a problem you'd like to solve using AI – and how.

Use the following headings to structure your answer. You can use bullet points.

1. Your idea in a nutshell: Name your project and describe it briefly.

2. Background: What is the problem your idea will solve? How common or frequent is this problem? What is your personal motivation? Why is this topic important or interesting?

3. Data: What data sources does your project depend on? Almost all AI solutions depend on some data. The availability and quality of the data are essential.

4. How is it used: What is the context in which your solution is used, and by whom? Who are the people affected by it?

5. Challenges: What does your project not solve? It’s important to understand that any technological solution will have its limitations.

6. What next: How could your project grow and become something more?

Guideline: approximately 800 - 1000 words with 1.5 spacing and Calibri 12 font.

Part 2: (15%)

You are required to prepare and deliver a presentation which examines the potential ethical issues arising from this project; discusses and evaluates the evidence; and proposes a balanced judgement based on this evidence.

Evaluate alternative solutions and make your recommendations. Explain the basis for your decision.

Suggested Approach:

First Draft (not to be submitted):

Identify and research the issues. Get the facts. List and prioritise your concerns. You can use bullet points.

For example, how do the identified issues affect humanity/society as a whole? Are there short term and/or long term consequences? Are some groups disproportionately impacted?

Potential topics can be found from the areas of ethics, privacy/personal autonomy, racial profiling, security, sustainability, gender bias, future job security etc.

Refer to the powerpoint ‘prof dev + ct (discussion topics for ca)’ in my folder on Teams for more topic ideas.

Second Draft:

Your presenation should expand and develop the points you have raised in your first draft and propose answers to the ethical questions you have raised.

Task Description:

· Briefly describe the AI project (summary of Part 1)

· Identify and explain two ethical issues arising from the project

· Analyse the impacts of these ethical issues

· Discuss possible mitigation strategies or recommendations

o How could the ethical risks be reduced?

o What role should developers, organisations, corporations, governments or users play?

· Support your presentation with evidence

o Any references must be cited and listed at the end of the presentation

o Use of AI tools for drafting must be disclosed where required

Guideline: Presentation – 5 minutes per student.

Writing Guide: main criteria used in presentation evaluation:

· Evidence of adequate and appropriate background reading.

· A clear statement of aims and relevant selection of content.

· Sensible planning and organisation.

· Evidence of systematic thought and argument.

· Clarity of expression.

· Identification and depth of ethical analysis.

· Critical thinking and insight.

· Engagement with ethical implications and solutions.

· Developing reliable, rational evaluations of an argument or idea.

· Balanced and well supported judgments.

· Clarity, organisation and presentation (e.g. accurate typing and proof-reading, helpful diagrams, images, etc.).

· Observation of academic conventions, including bibliographic information.

· Observation of length guidelines.

Rubric

Learning outcome Excellent Very good Good Satisfactory Weak Inadequate

Demonstrate

critical thinking

and analytical

skills towards

industry-related

topics.

Excellent critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics with no major errors/omissions Very good critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics with very few major errors/omissions Good critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics with little evidence of major errors/omissions Adequate critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics with some major errors/omissions Weak critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics with many major errors/omissions Poor critical thinking and analytical skills towards industry-related topics with substantial errors/omissions